How Companies Are Accidentally Destroying Their Marketing Teams
Is your company sabotaging its marketing team? Drawing on CMI’s latest research, Robert Rose breaks down the three costly mistakes happening now that may not reveal themselves for months or even a few years.
April 30, 2026
Want to know the future of marketing teams?
Look at the decisions companies are making today that will undermine them three years from now.
That’s what Robert Rose, CMI’s chief strategy advisor, did recently when he joined Live With CMI hosts Amanda Subler and Joseph “JK” Kalinowski. Using the Content Marketing Institute’s 2026 Career and Salary Outlook: Content and Marketing Professionals (free registration), Robert reveals the mistakes companies are making now that could have detrimental long-term effects on marketing and marketers.
“Most businesses continue to look at marketing as a tax. So, the more efficiently [the marketer] can do it, the better they’re doing it,” Robert says.
Let’s look briefly at the three biggest mistakes, or watch the video (above) to understand all the implications of what’s happening now.
1. Chopping the bottom rungs of the career ladder
One in three companies is reducing entry-level hiring, according to the surveyed marketers.
"If we chop that off, three years from now, who are we left with? There is no more pipeline of those people,” Robert says.
"[Organizations] never hired kids out of college or the entry-level marketer because of what they could do today ... [They] were investing in kids that [they] knew would be amazing tomorrow.”
2. Hiring for execution
Companies not only rid the ranks of entry-level workers; they hire for execution.
Companies are turning marketing teams into cogs in a machine and not building long-term institutional value. That changes the nature of marketing roles. “They’re just there to configure technology and work with technology and be a performance marketer,” Robert says.
And because companies don’t operate for long-term growth, the marketing team members don’t either. “They don’t really have any passion or interest in the actual topic or the content of the company itself because they know they’re only going to be there for like 18 months,” he says.
3. Turning marketers into free agents
Twenty-seven percent of marketers tell CMI that their organization offers no career development opportunities, and only 25% say they’re very satisfied with what is offered.
"It's this idea of career hedging, which is degrading the ability for the business to create institutional value with their marketers because they're just not that dedicated to it,” Robert explains.
So, when a company won’t invest in someone, Robert says, the forward-looking marketer is more likely to do it on their own. And that often leads to freelancing. The survey finds 20% of individual contributors and 26% of leaders (directors and above) do side work.
Rewriting the future
"Effectiveness, slowing down, being more creative, and actually investing more into better content, better marketing, more effective marketing is the true value, but that expectation hasn't washed up to the management level yet,” Robert says.
The decisions companies make now won’t show up immediately. But in three years, the impact will be clear. What will that story be for your company?
Want more content marketing tips, insights, and examples? Subscribe to workday or weekly emails from CMI.
HANDPICKED RELATED CONTENT:
Read more about:
Advice From Content Marketing World Speakers