27 Great Content Writing Examples, Tips, and Tools
Attracting and keeping an audience’s attention with words isn’t easy. These two dozen tips, numerous tools, and motivating examples will make it easier.
May 6, 2026
Want to make your brand’s writing more powerful and effective? Study these content writing examples, tips, tools, and resources to make the task a little easier.
Great content writing captivates an audience. It compels them to stop and read, watch, or listen. It captures their attention for a few moments, minutes, or more. It motivates them to do the next thing.
But crafting content that does all that isn’t an easy task. Writing effectively for B2B and B2C audiences requires overcoming many challenges.
To help tackle the biggest hurdles, I’ve pulled together these web writing tips, examples, tools, and resources. They’re broken into four categories: capture attention, write for online readers, polish and refine, and reach and discoverability. While I don’t include generic AI tools, such as ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, and Copilot, they could also help you accomplish some of the tasks.
Let’s get to it.
Capture attention with your content writing
1. Go for the surprise
When viewers happen upon the unexpected, they stop for a second with a “Wait, what?!” reaction.
“Help-Dad.com” creates that response for Oatly, the oat milk brand, as shown in this screenshot of its Things We Do web page. It’s designed to make the scroller ask, “Why does dad need help?” And possibly, “Why is an oat milk brand asking that question?”
The page's opening paragraph uses a friendly tone to make the case for men adopting a plant-based lifestyle.
“Dads are the best, except when it comes to eating and drinking sustainably, in which case, dads are the worst. Compared with women of the same age, or younger men, or basically anyone any age anywhere, middle-aged and older men (44-75) are the least interested in anything vegan.”
That conversational fun continues in the next sentence that answers what some readers may be asking themselves after the first paragraph:
"That’s not just something the website writer-person made up, it’s based on real dad research we have collected and presented here as intel for you to use as you work toward your endgame: to win dad over to plant-based for the sake of the planet. Help Dad is designed to help start a conversation on climate change, by encouraging some difficult dinner-table conversations."
Want to go deeper into this campaign? Visit Oatly’s Things We Do: Brainwashing section.
2. Give text a starring role
Though visual storytelling relies on images, graphics, and video, it usually needs words, too. Working with the visual creators, writers can create video scripts that turn the complex into enticing stories.
J.P. Morgan has won the Content Marketing Award for best video for its Unpacked explainer series. This two-minute, 39-second video unpacks the concept of stock buybacks.
3. Nail down your headlines
I often say headlines are the powerhouse of your content writing. After all, if the headline isn’t successful, the content underneath it will never be read.
A 2024 study from Science Advances conducted over 30,000 field experiments with headlines from The Washington Post and Upworthy. It found that readers prefer simpler headlines (more common words and more readable writing) over complex ones. They also paid more attention to and more deeply processed the simpler headlines.
The headline in this article from WSI, a marketing agency network, delivers the simplicity readers prefer: Why Email Still Delivers the Highest ROI in 2026 (and How to Max It).
The headline is straightforward. It speaks to a potential pain point (is email still a good tactic), uses a strong adjective like “highest” to describe the outcome, notes recency (in 2026), and uses a parenthetical phrase (and how to max it) that tells readers what they will get from the piece. All those elements combine to clearly communicate the article’s value for the reader.
4. Analyze the impact of your content headlines
The Advanced Marketing Institute’s Headline Analyzer (free) lets you input a headline and see its emotional marketing value. Emotional words aren’t just fuzzy feelings; they create an impact on or resonate with the reader.
This headline, “17 Ways Marketing Automation Helps Companies Succeed,” earns an emotional marketing value (EMV) of 42.86%. The analyzer indicates it fosters an intellectual feeling.
As it explains, “To put this score in perspective, the English language contains approximately 20% EMV words. For comparison, most professional copywriters’ headlines will typically have 30% to 40% EMV words in their headlines.”
But you don’t need to rely on a single assessment. The CoSchedule Headline Analyzer, part of Headline Studio (free and paid versions), gave that same headline an emotional score of 14%. It also gives it a total score (73 out of 100) based on word balance, headline type, reading grade level, sentiment, clarity, and skimmability. CoSchedule’s tool also rates the use of common, uncommon, and power words.
5. Adjust title formats with this content writing tool
Title Case Converter (free) helps you convert titles into usable formats, so you don’t have to rekey, reformat, or look up capitalization rules for your headlines. You type the title, then click your preferred style book (AMA, AP, APA, Bluebook, Chicago, MLA, NY Times, or Wikipedia). You can also opt for other styles, such as sentence case, lowercase, or uppercase.
Then you can select from more options: keep words in all caps, enable multi-line input, show explanations, highlight changes, use straight quotes, and convert when text is pasted.
If you just need to format a title into a standard title case, the TitleCase tool (free) will do that.
6. Write how-to headlines
BuzzSumo research consistently concludes that “how-to” or guidance-focused headlines resonate far better with audiences than any other type.
HubSpot’s State of Marketing 2026 report says, “This year’s data shows that audiences reward brands that feel authentic, helpful, and human.”
It makes sense. Audiences seek information to learn something, and they want that content to be user-friendly. By writing phrases like “how to” in a headline, you deliver both.
As an educator of content marketers, CMI finds the how-to formula works well, as these two articles reflect:
7. Choose motivating and trusting words
A single word or phrase often has a big job to do — to get someone to trust or motivate them to do something. To accomplish that goal, writers should turn to power words, which do a lot in a limited number of characters.
Blogging Explorer published a guide of 3,700 power words that boost clicks and conversations. It breaks them into 22 categories depending on your goals, from action, anger, and authority to trust, urgency, and vanity.
Here’s a sample in the trust category:
Accredited
Accurate
Acknowledged
Exact
Exceptional
Expert
Recommended
Reconciled
Reliable
Hootsuite opts for one of those power words (expert) in this headline: Social Media Management: The 2026 Expert Playbook and another power word (proving) in the intro line: “Four social experts share insights on the future of social media management, from team structures to strategy and proving business impact.”
Here are nine of the action power words:
Achieve
Acquire
Activate
Generate
Get
Give
Pledge
Ponder
Position
In the example in the screenshot below, Hootsuite uses two of those action words (get and generate):
Get strategic advice on demand.
Generate on-brand captions and images.
8. Keep it brief but convey a lot
Given your audience reads on screens, your web writing usually appears in a small space. Yet, it still must reflect a strong message.
Here’s a mobile screenshot of the home page of Gusto, a payroll provider.
It uses one word (“simplified”) to convey that it gets the visitor’s problem and confirms the services it provides in three words (“payroll,” “HR,” and “benefits").
It sticks to five words or less in highlighting specific benefits:
Payroll takes just a few clicks.
Sync hours with payroll.
Pay yourself compliantly as a solopreneur.
Choosing one word to convey the perfect sentiment makes the most of your available content space. To help, Jon Morrow of Smart Blogger offers a collection of words that can make a difference in your writing: The Original List of 317 Words That Influence Readers. Here are 15 of them:
Agony
Apocalypse
Armageddon
Assault
Backlash
Beating
Blinded
Fooled
Frantic
Frightening
Gambling
Gullible
Hack
Hazardous
In this headline — What the ESG Backlash of 2025 Means for Corporate America in 2026 — SLR Consulting opted for the high-impact word “backlash.”
I want to issue a caveat on this option: High-impact words can quickly become overused by humans and AI. For example, “hack” became oversaturated several years ago.
Write for online readers
9. Focus on clarity for web content
Explaining your product or service can get cumbersome, but don’t let it be. Help people quickly understand how your company can help solve their pain points.
Asana, a work management platform, does this well.
“Supercharge your teams with AI that gets work done," the brand's homepage states. "Give your teams AI that understands their work, keeps projects moving, and gets better the more your teams use it.”
The text highlights the outcome, “Supercharge your teams,” from using the product, “AI that gets work done.”
In one sentence, it highlights the tool’s three primary benefits:
Understands the team’s work
Keeps projects moving
Gets better the more it’s used
The two-word CTA options (get started or view demo) make it instantly clear what the visitor should do next.
10. Length isn’t everything
Content length rules and preferences give helpful guideposts for web writing.
Google makes 30 characters available in its ad headlines. Here’s the example it provides that includes three headlines, “Comprehensive Insurance,” “Protect Yourself on a Budget,” and “Get Your Free Quote Today.”
On social media, character parameters are higher, but don’t maximize them if you want more engagement.
For example, while Instagram allows up to 2,200-characters in captions, experts say the ideal length is 125 characters — the space visible before the "read more.”
Sometimes writing fewer than 125 characters can work well and draw attention in a crowded feed, as this sample from IBM shows. In 78 characters, IBM connects its brand to the start of the Formula 1 racing season without explicitly detailing the partnership: “Suited up. Strapped in. We’re ready for the 2026 season with @scuderiaferrari.”
Of course, exceptions exist. If your content’s primary goal is search or answer engine optimization, longer content is almost always best. Long-form content often helps generate high rankings for targeted keyword phrases and similar words and attracts citations in AI results.
11. Choose short words for web writing
You don’t need to use big, fancy words to get your point across. Short ones, also known as scannable words, can work in your favor. Consider these common examples of better scannable choices:
“Show,” not “indicate”
“Get rid of,” not “eliminate”
“Use,” not “utilize”
“To,” not “in order to”
“Help,” not “facilitate”
“Get,” not “obtain”
12. Be conscious of pronouns
A conversational approach typically works best when you’re creating web content. Writing in the first or second person can accomplish this.
Embracing inclusivity also fosters a conversational atmosphere.
When using pronouns, make sure it’s clear to what the pronoun refers. Ensuring clarity is especially important when people in your content use they/them pronouns. For example, you could phrase it, “Alex Alumino, who uses they/them pronouns ...” Or, even better, just repeat their name in the sentence so there’s no need to explain their pronoun preference.
13. Read your web content in scanning mode
Here’s some sad news for content writers: Readers won’t consume every word in your content. They skip and scan to see if the content is a good fit for them, and then they hope they can glean the relevant information without having to read it all.
As you write, think about how the text will look visually. Make it easy for readers to scan your content by including:
Short paragraphs
Subheads
Bulleted lists
Bolded text
Words in color
Links
14. Read aloud
If your content doesn’t flow as you speak it, it may not work for the reader. Pay attention when you take too many pauses or pause in places where no comma exists. Adjust your text — break the sentence into two or add a comma.
Microsoft Word offers a read-aloud feature through its immersive reader tools, while Google Docs can use a Chrome extension from Speechify to give a voice to the content.
Polish and refine your web writing
15. Use a tool to keep track of word counts
Meet your word count goals and improve your word choice with the WordCounter tool (free). It also helps identify keywords and their appropriate frequency of use.
You can also use the word and character count tools embedded in your documents. In Microsoft Word, it can be found on the bottom left. With Google Docs, just press control, shift, and C buttons at the same time.
16. Use tools to help recognize common writing mistakes
Grammar Girl, created by Mignon Fogarty, founder of Quick and Dirty Tips, outlines some common mistakes, such as this example on the use of that vs. which in writing:
“The simple rule is to use ‘that’ with a restrictive element and ‘which’ with a non-restrictive element ... The cupcakes that have sprinkles are still in the fridge. The words 'that have sprinkles' restrict the kind of cupcake we’re talking about. Without those words, the meaning of the sentence would change. Without them, we’d be saying that all the cupcakes are still in the fridge, not just the ones with sprinkles.”
While grammar tools are embedded into most software, external apps can help too. Grammarly (free and fee) automates grammar, spelling, and punctuation checks, often giving better, cleaner content options. The tool also alerts writers to passive voice, suggests opportunities to be concise, and assesses overall tone.
You also can save time and energy with ProWritingAid (fee). It eliminates the need to reread to polish your content. This AI editing software offers more than grammar checks. It checks vague wording, sentence length variation, and overuse of adverbs and passive voice. The tool also identifies complicated or run-on sentences.
17. Use parallel construction
Parallel construction organizes the text and relieves your readers of expending mental energy to piece together the thoughts.
For example, this mish-mash list varies the sentence structures:
It could be time to look over your business software contract.
Consider the best products.
If you want the product to benefit your company, include others’ points of view.
This list is parallel because every sentence starts the same way — with a verb.
Review your business software contract.
Shop for the best products based on features, costs, and support options.
Ask key members of your team for their perspectives, including productivity barriers.
18. Know when to break the infinitive rule
Good grammar means avoiding splitting infinitives. However, sometimes you might need to bypass that rule in favor of publishing unawkward content.
ProWritingAid explains that split infinitives are nothing new — their use dates to the 1300s. However, there is a time and place for them.
In this example, the split infinitive is helpful because the adverb “fully” is better connected to the verb “grasp.” If the infinitive wasn’t split, “fully” could be seen as an afterthought or a modifier of “problem.”
Split infinitive: She failed to fully grasp the problem.
No split infinitive: She failed to grasp the problem fully.
Sometimes, the split infinitive is necessary to create a voice and rhythm as in this well-known phrase:
Split infinitive: To boldly go where no one has gone before.
No split infinitive: To go boldly where no one has gone before.
19. Don’t overuse words
Redundancy bores. To figure out if you’re committing this sin, paste your text into the Word It Out tool (free). The cloud visualizes proportionately the most often used words in your text. (It also lets you see if your content hits the intended themes.)
This word cloud for a recent CCO article about marketing leaders future-readying their teams shows “marketing” and “AI” front and center. That’s no surprise, but are those words used too much?
After creating your own word clouds, review the content to see if some synonyms or editing to avoid some occasions of frequently used words would improve it.
If you (or your AI tool) use words too frequently, visit Thesaurus.com to find alternatives.
20. Try this content writing tool to replace jargon-like words
You need to speak your audience’s language, but that doesn’t mean you need to adopt the industry’s jargon. De-Jargonizer (free) is designed to help analyze the jargon in scholarly articles, but the tool works just as well with your content writing.
In this example from a CMI article, The Skills Trap: How Marketers Optimize for the Wrong Future, De-Jargonizer identifies 3% of the piece incorporates “rare” words, such as “democratized,” “futurist,” “throughline,” and “defensible.” It also shows the percentage of common words (90%), mid-frequency (7%), and gives it a suitability score for audiences (93).
If your content writing is filled with those rare words — aka potential jargon — scrutinize them to see what, if anything, should be replaced with more reader-friendly options.
The De-Jargonizer site also has some other writing assistance options:
Half-life to distill your message using a writing exercise
Persuasion and rhetorics to make your writing more effective and persuasive
Coherence coach to develop a cohesive flow between your ideas
Critical thinking coach to strengthen your reasoning with guided prompts
Ethics guide to help you think through the implications of research projects
21. Check your readability score
Even if readers can understand the jargon and complex sentences, they probably don’t want to work hard to understand the content. To assess if your writing is on the easier side of reading, use a tool like Web FX’s Readability Test (free). It scores your content’s average reading ease and targeted readership age.
In the example in the screenshot below, it concludes that Fedex.com has a reading ease of 87.2 out of 100, which should be easily understood by 8- to 9-year-olds.
You can scroll down the readability test page to see other scores, including Flesch Kincaid reading ease, Flesch Kincaid grade level, Gunning Fog, SMOG Index, Coleman Liau, and Automated Readability Index.
The bottom of the evaluation includes the statistics about the evaluated text, including:
Total sentences
Total words
Complex words
Percentage of complex words
Average words per sentence
Average syllables per word
It also highlights the hard sentences, very hard sentences, passive voice sentences, and adverbs, where writing could be improved. It also uses AI to analyze the tone of the content. In FedEx’s case, the website tone was “professional” and “high confidence.”
Always adjust your writing to meet your audience’s preferred readership level, which isn’t necessarily the same as their understanding level.
22. Evaluate sentence structure with the Hemingway Editor app
Want more help to write content that’s easy to read? Consider tools like Hemingway App (free and paid), which provide immediate and detailed feedback on content structure, including sentence formatting. With the website version, you can replace the default text with your own.
Hemingway App identifies potentially unnecessary adverbs, warns about passive voice, and triggers alerts to dull, complicated words.
In this web writing example from its home page, Hemingway App highlights one of the 13 sentences as very hard to read, one as hard to read, two weaker phrases, and one word with a simpler alternative.
Extend your content writing’s reach and discoverability
23. Write to win over readers
How does your content inspire readers or get them to care?
Some suggestions include:
Focus on actionable content they can use right away.
Establish instant credibility and expertise, so they understand why you’re the go-to resource.
Add value they won't see or find elsewhere.
This ad for the CMI newsletter works well as a sample of website content writing. It illustrates how to motivate the audience to see that the content is relevant. Its headline “Looking for Fresh Content Inspiration?” speaks directly to the reader. Its follow-up sentence explains in detail what the reader will get — advice, examples, and ideas.
24. Use plagiarism checkers
In recent years, advancements in AI have prompted growth in automated plagiarism checkers. Microsoft Word embeds the feature option in its software as does Grammarly. You also can use tools dedicated to ensuring that the content writing isn’t a copycat (or being copycatted), such as Copyscape (free).
Of course, no plagiarism checker is 100% accurate, so before you accuse a content writer of plagiarism, triple-check the results (and add a human touch whenever appropriate).
25. Use a topic tool for writing inspiration
HubSpot’s Blog Ideas Generator (free) works well to get your creative content writing juices flowing. Just describe your blog and get some ideas.
For example, for the topic of marketing automation tools, it came up with this list:
Top 10 Marketing Automation Tools to Boost Your Business in 2023
How Marketing Automation Tools Can Transform Your Digital Strategy
A Beginner's Guide to Choosing the Right Marketing Automation Tools
Maximize Your ROI: The Benefits of Using Marketing Automation Tools
The Future of Marketing: 5 Innovative Automation Tools You Need to Know
Obviously, not all of them would work well now — this is 2026, and it suggested a title referencing 2023. However, even if the titles aren’t a great fit, they can spark ideas.
You can also edit your prompt to get different results or use it to generate the blog post.
26. Take optimization responsibilities seriously in web writing
In 2026, writers blending SEO into their content face a more complex task. You must write for traditional search and AI answer engines.
With traditional search, aim too low and you use rarely searched keywords. Aspire too high, and the content won’t rank among all the competition. To identify potential keywords, use free and paid tools like Moz Keyword Explorer, Semrush, Google Ads Planner, and Soovle.
For AI citation visibility, content depth, structure, and freshness matter more than traditional ranking signals. To increase the chances of appearing in AI-generated answers, prioritize long-form content that answers the reader's question early, include original data and expert quotes, update content regularly, and use structured data markup.
Fortunately, optimized content that serves readers tends to perform well in both scenarios.
27. Monitor relevant topics to get ideas for your content
With Feedly, you can stay informed about what matters most and avoid information overload. This AI assistant learns your preferences, then culls and curates content from the internet that you want and need.
Reddit works well as a resource for social listening, too. Just follow the subreddits that relate to your brand, industry, and related topics.
Share your favorite writing tricks
What content creation and copywriting productivity tools do you favor? What do you do each day to make your writing tasks just a little easier? Please tag CMI on social media using #CMWorld.
Updated from an August 2024 article.
All tools mentioned in this article were suggested by the author. If you’d like to suggest a tool, share the article on social media with a comment.
Like what you read here? Get yourself a subscription to daily or weekly updates. It’s free – and you can change your preferences or unsubscribe anytime.