Stories have power. As B2B marketers, we tap into that power to capture attention—and business.
But implementing story elements in content (especially pithy social posts) can feel like more work than it's worth.
There's a reason it feels impossible to make stories work across typical marketing efforts: the Hero's Journey. Before we start throwing things at this narrative structure's creator, Joseph Campbell, let's identify why it hinders B2B storytelling.
The Hero's Journey is considered by many to be the end-all, be-all roadmap for marketers. The cycle of the journey is at the core of the Star Wars franchise and other hit media. It's popular because when done well, it works—and because people inherently understand the structure.
The Hero's Journey Cycle
Graphic credit: Godfrey
The problem is clunkiness.
The Hero's Journey is enormous, requiring a lot of set up. And it's almost impossible to pull off within the short attention spans and character counts of modern B2B content.
But the good news is that there are many other narrative structures B2B marketers can use to tell better stories.
Let's dive into some effective modes of storytelling that capture and keep audience attention.
The Collective Journey
What It Is
A collective journey focuses on a group of characters, rather than one hero, working toward a common goal. Popular in fantasy, science fiction, and comic books, this narrative structure engages multiple perspectives and often reveals the value of interconnectedness. Think of The Avengers movies.
Why It Works
Buyer journeys today include multiple stakeholders. You're looking to reach a cadre of job roles. Using a collective journey, you can create multiple narrative threads for your campaigns that speak directly to them all.
How to Apply It
Use collective journey storytelling to create multiple paths for potential customers that speak directly to their roles and concerns.
You could use Instagram for end users and brand recognition, LinkedIn for the c-suite interested in efficiency, and email to reach mid-level managers about training and support.
Collective Journey Example
For brands providing products regulated for public safety, like fire sprinkler systems, it's common to target governing bodies, specifying engineers and end users.
For a new sprinkler launch, a collective journey structure could weave three narrative paths focused on the main priorities of each: one on compliance, another on ease of installation, and a third on cleanup and cost savings.
Kishōtenketsu
What It Is
Pronounced "kee-show-ten-ketsu," this storytelling structure is all about the cycle. It establishes a situation, develops it, introduces a twist, and explores how the situation responds to that twist.
This story pattern is perfect for brands using social media to tell a story over months or years.
Why It Works
Some stories don't end because they're ongoing. And now, with always-on social media, the brand story can be a living thing.
This style allows for a story to be tweaked, repeated, and resolved in a way that doesn't stop the conversation. Your "story" on social might be singular, but it likely has dozens of threads.
Kishōtenketsu leaves plenty of room for new products and ideas without radically shifting the overall narrative.
How to Apply It
Kishōtenketsu is best used to continue an established story—like part of ongoing social media efforts.
Use this storytelling mode to explain how a new product fits within the rest of your solution lineup.
Because this storytelling model doesn't require the typical problem-solution formula, you can use it to create social posts that illustrate your brand's personality and culture.
Kishōtenketsu Example
A good example of this storytelling technique can be seen on Squarespace's Instagram. Because they are in the business of helping businesses, their Instagram is full of stories about those businesses succeeding or finding surprising results.
Squarespace certainly scatter tips and tricks throughout their social posts, but they have embraced a continual story model, whether it's about the company itself or about the people it serves.
Trickster Stories
What It Is
From Loki and Anansi to Coyote and Māui, people around the world have delighted in mischievous characters.
Besides a slippery protagonist, trickster stories typically include disruption, clever problem-solving, and the potential for transformative change. In this way, the structure can help folks navigate the complexity and discomfort of uncertainty and adapt to forces out of their control.
Why It Works
Like many engineers, tricksters are typically curious and use their ingenuity to solve problems in unexpected ways. The playful nature of a trickster story keeps the audience guessing, acting as a hook that pulls their attention back to your brand.
How to Apply It
If your brand or product breaks industry rules, lean into the mischief while communicating the benefits. Give it character and a confident, carefree voice that reminds your audience about the fun and creativity that fuels innovation.
Trickster Stories Example
Look no further than snack food social media.
In 2017, the century-old brand MoonPie racked up 1.1 billion impressions for a single, six-character post. After Hostess tweeted its golden cupcakes were the official snack cake of the 2017 solar eclipse, MoonPie retweeted "Lol ok."
Tell New Stories That Leave a Lasting Impact
Storytelling is a proven tactic for making sure your message—big or small—is memorable. People are more engaged when presented stories in an unexpected way. And it's our job as marketers to craft those tales.
By moving beyond the Hero's Journey and exploring different narrative techniques, you can tell more effective B2B stories that stand out, impacting audiences anew and forging lasting connections with your brand.
More Resources on B2B Writing and Storytelling
The Marketing God Complex: How to Use Narrative Responsibly in B2B Marketing
Storytelling: Secret Weapon of Entrepreneurs and Marketers
From Thought Leadership to Thought Diagnosis: Creating Interactive Lead Generation